---
title: Bearer Authentication
sidebar:
  order: 3
---

OAS **3** This guide is for OpenAPI 3.0.

## Bearer Authentication

**Bearer authentication** (also called **token authentication**) is an [HTTP authentication scheme](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Authentication) that involves security tokens called bearer tokens. The name “Bearer authentication” can be understood as “give access to the bearer of this token.” The bearer token is a cryptic string, usually generated by the server in response to a login request. The client must send this token in the `Authorization` header when making requests to protected resources:

```yaml
Authorization: Bearer <token>
```

The Bearer authentication scheme was originally created as part of [OAuth 2.0](/specification/authentication/oauth2/) in [RFC 6750](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6750), but is sometimes also used on its own. Similarly to [Basic authentication](/specification/authentication/basic-authentication/), Bearer authentication should only be used over HTTPS (SSL).

### Describing Bearer Authentication

In OpenAPI 3.0, Bearer authentication is a security scheme with `type: http` and `scheme: bearer`. You first need to define the security scheme under `components/securitySchemes`, then use the `security` keyword to apply this scheme to the desired scope – global (as in the example below) or specific operations:

```yaml
    openapi: 3.0.0
    ...

    # 1) Define the security scheme type (HTTP bearer)
    components:
      securitySchemes:
        bearerAuth:            # arbitrary name for the security scheme
          type: http
          scheme: bearer
          bearerFormat: JWT    # optional, arbitrary value for documentation purposes

    # 2) Apply the security globally to all operations
    security:
      - bearerAuth: []         # use the same name as above
```

Optional `bearerFormat` is an arbitrary string that specifies how the bearer token is formatted. Since bearer tokens are usually generated by the server, `bearerFormat` is used mainly for documentation purposes, as a hint to the clients. In the example above, it is "JWT", meaning [JSON Web Token](https://jwt.io). The square brackets `[]` in _bearerAuth: \[\]_ contain a list of security scopes required for API calls. The list is empty because scopes are only used with OAuth 2 and [OpenID Connect](/specification/authentication/openid-connect-discovery/). In the example above, Bearer authentication is applied globally to the whole API. If you need to apply it to just a few operations, add `security` on the operation level instead of doing this globally:

```yaml
paths:
  /something:
    get:
      security:
        - bearerAuth: []
```

Bearer authentication can also be combined with other authentication methods as explained in [Using Multiple Authentication Types](/specification/authentication/#multiple).

### 401 Response

You can also define the 401 “Unauthorized” response returned for requests that do not contain a proper bearer token. Since the 401 response will be used by multiple operations, you can define it in the global `components/responses` section and reference elsewhere via `$ref`.

```yaml
    paths:
      /something:
        get:
          ...
          responses:
            '401':
              $ref: '#/components/responses/UnauthorizedError'
            ...
        post:
          ...
          responses:
            '401':
              $ref: '#/components/responses/UnauthorizedError'
            ...

    components:
      responses:
        UnauthorizedError:
          description: Access token is missing or invalid
```

To learn more about `responses`, see [Describing Responses](/specification/describing-responses/).

_Did not find what you were looking for? [Ask the community](https://community.smartbear.com/t5/Swagger-Open-Source-Tools/bd-p/SwaggerOSTools)  
Found a mistake? [Let us know](https://github.com/swagger-api/swagger.io/issues)_
